Perceptual Space Warping: Preliminary Exploration
Alex Peer∗ Kevin Ponto†
Living Environments Lab
University of Wisconsin-Madison
ABSTRACT
Distance has been shown to be incorrectly estimated in virtual
environments relative to the same estimation tasks in a real environ-
ment. This work describes a preliminary exploration of Perceptual
Space Warping, which influences perceived distance in virtual en-
vironments by using a vertex shader to warp geometry. Empirical
tests demonstrate significant effects, but of smaller magnitude than
expected.
Index Terms: H.5.1 [Information Interfaces and Presenta-
tion]: Multimedia Information Systems—Artificial, augmented,
and virtual realities ; I.3.7 [Computing Methodologies]: Graphics
Utilities—Virtual reality
1 INTRODUCTION
Distance compression (DC), the perceived underestimation of
ego-centric distances, is a well researched phenomenon in virtual
environments (VEs). Renner et al. found an average reported un-
derestimation of 26% across 30 papers[2]. While many researchers
have noted the effects of distance compression, and many possible
influences have been explored, the principle factors responsible for
this phenomenon remain largely unknown.
This paper presents Perceptual Space Warping (PSW), which
aims to mitigate distance compression by altering the VE in a
shader during runtime. PSW results in a final image similar to
the geometric minification shown by [1]; however, PSW can be
used without knowledge of device screen parameters or calibrated
FOV, and at a different place in the rendering pipeline. Although
not explored here, PSW could allow for piecewise linear or non-
linear warps; it also influences depth directly, allowing it to work in
concert with other techniques that would not be affected by image-
space manipulations, such as depth of field. A potential disadvan-
tage: at larger warp modifiers, PSW introduces a distortion we call
”swim”, which causes the vague sensation, but not the actual vi-
suals, of surfaces rippling or bending. Also, at very large warp
modifiers, the scene is noticeably stretched.
2 METHOD
PSW is implemented using a vertex shader that transforms ver-
tices by increasing their distance from the viewer on the viewspace
z-axis. Formally, we define this transformation as:
Vout =M−1× ((M×Vin)× (1,1,wm,1)) (1)
where Vin is an unwarped vertex position in 3-space and Vout is
the warped resulting position, M is the modelview matrix, and wm
is the warp multiplier. By modifying wm, one adjusts the magni-
tude and direction of the warp; a wm of 1 causes no change, < 1
pulls objects closer, and> 1 pushes them further away. This shader
was implemented in the Unity game engine. The Oculus Rift DK2
∗e-mail: alex.peer@wisc.edu
†e-mail: kbponto@wisc.edu
Physical
Beanbag
HMD
Perceptual 
Space Warp
Virtual Target
Figure 1: PSW moves objects relative to the viewer.
head-mounted display (HMD) was used to display the VE, using
the Oculus v0.6 SDK and Unity integration.
A blind throwing task was used to measure participant’s percep-
tion of distance, similar to Sahm et al’s [3]; we differ in that our
participants are seated, and we use no blindfolds in Experiment 1.
3 EXPERIMENT 1
The goal of Experiment 1 (E1) is to confirm that our task does
elicit and measure distance compression, and to explore the effect
of PSW. This yields five key hypotheses: H1: Participants will be
able to throw bean bags accurately, in the favorable conditions of
real environment (RE) with visual feedback. H2: Participants will
experience distance compression when viewing our VEs. H3: PSW
will have a significant and positive effect mitigating distance com-
pression. H4: The virtual reality environment will change the de-
gree of effect of PSW. H5: Target distance will not influence per-
cent error of thrown distance to target.
10 participants were recruited during an outreach event held be-
tween our lab and a local nonprofit; due to the informal nature of
the event, no demographics were gathered.
3.1 Design and Procedure
Participants proceeded through three phases in the following or-
der: P0 Practice Throwing, P1 RE Throwing, P2 VE Throwing.
In P2, 3 factors were investigated in the VE: warp, the presence
or absence of PSW (within, 2 levels: no warp, wm of 1.4); environ-
ment, the surrounding environment in which the target is presented
(between, 2 levels: sparse, rich); distance, the distance of the target
from the participant (within, 11 levels: 0.1m intervals between 4m
and 3m).
In P2 participants threw once at each of the 11 distances in each
warp condition, presented in random order, for a total of 22 throws
in the VE. Each participant saw one environment, half assigned to
sparse and half to rich. P1 consisted of 11 real-world throws at
distances of 3m (4 throws), 3.5m (3 throws), and 4m (4 throws),
in random order. P0 asked participants to practice throwing at a
3.7m target until they felt comfortable with the task. To maintain
the brisk pace necessitated by the venue, no blindfolds were used
in the real-world, and the screen was not blanked in the virtual.
3.2 Analysis
A 2(warp)x2(environment)x11(distance) ANOVA shows a sig-
nificant increase in accuracy in warp 1.4 conditions ( F(1,8) =
69.7780, p < 0.0001 ). No other significant main effect or inter-
action was found. This supports H3 and H5, but not H4.
261
IEEE Virtual Reality Conference 2016
19–23 March, Greenville, SC, USA
978-1-5090-0836-0/16/$31.00 ©2016 IEEE
Participants threw accurately in the RE, ( percent error: M=-
3.6, SD = 8.1 ), and underthrew in VE no warp conditions ( per-
cent error: M=-32.3, SD=12.6 ), supporting H1 and H2; t(9)=7.25,
p=<0.0001.
Participants underthrew more than expected in VE warp 1.4x
conditions ( percent error: M=-18.1, SD=15.1; DC corrected:
M=14.1, SD=5.1 ), an interesting result for H3.
3.3 Discussion
Support for H1, H2, and H5 suggest our methods are viable for
further experiments. Lack of support for H4 suggests PSW is not
reliant on (or influenced by) depth cues present in rich scenes. This
is unexpected and may bear further investigation. Support for H3
in general was not unexpected, but it is surprising that a 1.4 warp
multiplier results in a significantly smaller mean correction of 14%,
rather than the expected 40%.
4 EXPERIMENT 2
Experiment 2 (E2) investigates three potential confounds or en-
hancements suggested by E1: Swim distortion, Calibration, and wm
to Distance Mapping Exploration. E2 progressed as follows: P0
practice throwing, P1 throwing over intervals, P2 calibration, P3
calibrated throwing, P4 real-world throwing and post-experiment
interview. The practice phase P0 was as in E1. P4 saw real-world
throwing to a target at 4m using the HMD as a blindfold; partici-
pants who were not accurate in P4 were removed from the current
analysis (2 removed). Participants were also screened for stereo
sensitivity via a random dot stereogram test (3 removed). 9 partic-
ipants total provide the data for our final analysis, recruited from
the local campus (ages 19-35; 4 female). The throwing task in P1
and P3 was similar to that of E1, but the scene was hidden during
the throw to better match [3]. Scenes were displayed for 5 seconds
before the screen went blank.
Swim: As discussed in the introduction, PSW introduces a dis-
tortion we call swim which may change perception of depth with
change of head pose. We created a second pose-independent warp
shader that creates a warp valid for only a single head rotation. This
eliminates the swim distortion for the controlled scenes in our ex-
periment, but not the general case. Both P1 and P3 involve swim
distortion as a factor (swim) of two levels: full swim, no swim.
Calibration: In P2 we ask participants change wm via joystick
to visually align a virtual and real target, by repeatedly removing
and replacing the HMD to view both VE and RE. The average of
4 trials is the participant’s calibrated VM, which is used for blind
throwing in P3.
Mapping: In E1, a wm of 1.4 did not map to the distance ex-
pected. P1 asks participants to throw at many wms, to better de-
scribe the relationship between wm and perceived distance.
This yields the following specific hypotheses:
H1. Eliminating the swim distortion will improve blind throwing
accuracy. H2. Users can perform the calibration task of matching
a virtual and real target. H3. Using a user-calibrated warp multi-
plier will improve blind throwing accuracy. H4. The optimal warp
multiplier will be dependent on the individual participant. H5. The
relationship between warp multiplier and distance thrown is linear
and monotonically increasing.
4.1 Design and Analysis
P1: 8 x 2 factorial, within-participant: 8 wm (0.6 to 2.0 at inter-
vals of 0.2) x 2 swim (full swim, no swim), 3 throws per condition.
Target distance also varied; each participant threw to the same set
of 48 distances between 3m to 4m (0.1m intervals). 48 throws total,
random order, double blind.
P3. 2 x 11 factorial, within-participant: 2 warp (no warp, per-
sonal warp) x 2 swim (full swim, no swim) x 11 distances (3m to
4m at 0.1m intervals). 22 throws total, random order, double blind.
Figure 2: Linear fits of participants’ throwing error over different wms.
Xs indicate wms expected to yield 0 error for that participant.
P1: An 8 (wm) x 2 (swim) repeated measures ANOVA showed
only a significant main effect of warp multiplier ( F(7,56)=37.95, p
< 0.0001 ); no further significant main effect or interaction. This
shows no support for H1. As shown in Figure 2, the shape of the
graphs support H5, and the individual variance of the x-axis cross-
ings where error is 0 supports H4.
P2: 7 of 9 calibrated wms are near or less than 1 ( M=-0.03,
SD=0.02; 4 <0.9, 4 ≈1, 2 >1.1 ). This does not support H2.
P3: A 2 (swim) x 11 (distance) repeated measures ANOVA
showed no significant main effects or interactions. This shows no
support for H1, though it further reinforces E1 H5. Calibrated wms
result in significant percent throwing error ( M=-28.9, SD=16.9 ),
and little per-participant correction ( M=-3.7, SD=6.2 ). This does
not support H3.
4.2 Discussion and Conclusion
Swim: We see no evidence that removing swim influenced per-
ception of distance. In post-experiment interviews, only two par-
ticipants mentioned noticing swim when it was described to them.
The throwing task used may not elicit enough head movement to
fully show the effects of swim.
Calibration: In P2, only 2 participants selected wms that would
mitigate DC ( >1 ), and calibrated wms did little to correct DC in
P3. Had participants chosen consistent wms, it might indicate they
were selecting the correct calibration for the HMD; had we seen
increased DC correction, we might conclude each participant per-
ceived a unique miscalibration. In the absence of either, we suspect
our calibration task was too difficult to perform accurately.
Mapping: The mapping seems to be fairly linear and monoton-
ically increasing. Per-user differences in estimated wm for 0 error
suggests a per-user wm may be worth exploring, though some are
quite extreme (> 2) and may induce distortion.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported in part by the University of Wisconsin
- Madison Fall Research Competition.
REFERENCES
[1] B. Li, R. Zhang, A. Nordman, and S. A. Kuhl. The effects of minifica-
tion and display field of view on distance judgments in real and hmd-
based environments. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGGRAPH Sympo-
sium on Applied Perception, pages 55–58. ACM, 2015.
[2] R. S. Renner, B. M. Velichkovsky, and J. R. Helmert. The perception of
egocentric distances in virtual environments-a review. ACM Computing
Surveys (CSUR), 46(2):23, 2013.
[3] C. S. Sahm, S. H. Creem-Regehr, W. B. Thompson, and P. Willemsen.
Throwing versus walking as indicators of distance perception in similar
real and virtual environments. ACM Transactions on Applied Percep-
tion (TAP), 2(1):35–45, 2005.
262
