Making Invisible Things Visible: Tracking Down Known Vulnerabilities at 3000 Companies
(Showcase)

Gazi Mahmud
Sonatype, USA
gmahmud@sonatype.com

ABSTRACT
This year, software development teams around the world are consuming BILLIONS of open source and third-party components. The good news: they are accelerating time to market. The bad news: 1 in 17 components they are using include known security vulnerabilities. In this talk, I will describe what Sonatype, the company behind The Central Repository that supports Apache Maven, has learned from analyzing how thousands of applications use open source components. I will also discuss how organizations like Mayo Clinic, Exxon, Capital One, the U.S. FDA and Intuit are utilizing the principles of software supply chain automation to improve application security and how organizations can balance the need for speed with quality and security early in the development cycle.
CCS Concepts
· Security and privacyVulnerability management · Software and its engineeringSoftware creation and management · Security and privacySoftware security engineering · Security and privacyWeb application security

Keywords
Software Component Lifecycle Management; Continuous Integration; DevOps; OSS Repository Hosting; OSSRH; Sonatype; The Central Repository; Nexus Repository OSS; Nexus Firewall; Open Source Software; Software Variability Management
BIOGRAPHY
Gazi Mahmud is a Senior Data Scientist and Lead Architect at Sonatype where he is responsible for the Technical Vision for innovation and Architecture Design for data pipeline pertinent to component intelligence and Software Supply Chain principles. He has 17 years of experience in Enterprise Software as a Service (SaaS) Architecture, and in Information Retrieval theories and practices across the facets of Big Data ecosystems. He holds an MS in Computer Science and a dual Bachelors degree in Applied Mathematics and Computer Science from University of California, Berkeley.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact the Owner/Author. Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). FSE'16, November 13­18, 2016, Seattle, WA, USA ACM. 978-1-4503-4218-6/16/11...$15.00 http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2950290.2994155
25

